---
layout: post
title: Apple vs FBI
category: articles 
date: 2016-02-29
---

Over the past few weeks, there has been some debate over privacy issues involving Apple, the FBI, and the San Bernardino terrorism case. Tim Cook has promised to Apple users everywhere that their privacy will not be compromised by a US government demand to hack into the San Bernardino suspects' iPhone. The FBI is asking Apple to build a separate operating system to install onto the suspect's iPhone, bypassing the passcode feature that currently comes standard on every iPhone.

A more detailed description of the case can be found [at the New York Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/technology/apple-unlock-iphone-fbi-san-bernardino-brief.html).

My opinion? Maybe I'm biased, as a user of many Apple products, but I agree with Apple and Tim Cook's rationale on the case. Apple is built upon the idea of sturdy hardware and software coming together to create a user experience secure from the outside world. In building an operating system that gets around the passcode feature, Apple would undermine the idea of privacy that it has tried so hard to build.

This goes beyond a simple issue of Apple vs the rest of the world. I hate to make a slippery slope argument, but in law, pointing at past cases is a good way to validate oneself. There haven't been cases like this in the past that ruled in the government's favor. If Apple folds, courts can point to this case in the future to give government more leeway into getting tech companies to step around their own privacy guidelines.

The New York Times also published an [article](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/19/technology/apple-fbi-reaction.html?action=click&contentCollection=Technology&module=RelatedCoverage&region=Marginalia&pgtype=article) with reader comments regarding the case. I think many reader arguments hold merit.
