---
layout: post
title: Improvement and theory
category: blog 
date: 2016-09-29
---

I've recently been getting emails from Domain.com, telling me to go renew the domain name I bought last year during this time. I was at my first hackathon at Dartmouth, and we quite ambitiously bought a domain name so that our project would be more legitimate. Oh, how times have changed. I took an assembly language course and a web programming course. I have now worked with Flask, Node, Angular, Express, Jekyll, Bootstrap, and a whole bunch of other frameworks that have made me a better developer. I've built API's and command line tools, a Boggle game and an image manipulator. I've made it a long way since HackDartmouth. 

By the way, I don't hate JavaScript as much anymore.

So it's a new semester and of course I'm getting into more theoretical computer science (programming languages and computation theory). As a math person, I'm enjoying this a lot, especially the proofs and the inductive reasoning. 

I want to shift my focus as a programmer from web programming to more mathematically-focused code. How do I optimize my algorithms? Which language is right for my purposes? What parameters do I need to consider when building a learning algorithm? How can I use my knowledge of statistics to make my programs smarter?

This is what I'll be focusing on in my internship search this year. If you'd like to hire me, here's my [resume](/resume/resume.html), and here's my [email](derickwyang@gmail.com). Also feel free to email me if you have suggestions about this site/any of my other projects.
